Trauma is like a virus and it gets
passed along to your children even if
their children are not born until years
later because trauma can change the
expression of our genes. So we need to
understand whether trauma is afflicting
us, how it's afflicting us, and how we
can treat it if it's there.
Dr. Paul Kante,
psychiatrist, expert in treating trauma.
He's worked with Kim Kardashian and
saved Lady Gaga's life
and been in clinical practice for over
two decades.
How many people have some form of
trauma? well over half the population
and trauma can change us in very
negative ways. For example, the odds of
traumatic brain changes are very very
high. We know trauma makes us age faster
than our calendar age. And we know that
ultimately the root of depression,
addiction, Parkinson's disease is from
trauma. Modern science knows this, but
we'll give them pills with the idea that
a pill is going to fix everything. And
then we're surprised that tens of
thousands of people die each year from
prescribed pills. And we've let that
happen. What should we be doing instead?
The key to all of this is curiosity. So,
for example, let's say someone is
addicted to their phone. Often times,
addictive behavior is meant as an escape
from something or even to self-punish.
But when you scratch the surface of
that, you might learn about an episode
of sexual abuse that happened when the
person was a child. This is not
uncommon.
What are the telltale signs that I am
traumatized? what can I do to alleviate
the trauma? And then, can you completely
get rid of a trauma?
The answer is based in hard science. So,
it's absolutely crazy to me that so many
of you have decided to watch our show.
Um, and so many of you have decided to
subscribe to our show. We now have 5
million subscribers on YouTube, which is
a number that I just can't comprehend.
And it's a dream that I absolutely never
could have had. We started the Dire of
Co just over 3 years ago now. And in my
wildest expectations, we might have had
100,000 subscribers by now. So, you can
imagine how shocked I am that so many of
you have chosen to tune into these
conversations every week um and spend
some time with us. So, thank you. And I
made a deal with you. I made a deal that
if you subscribe to this show that we
would continue to raise the bar. And in
2024, we're going to raise the bar like
never before. I've been working for the
last 9 months on a surprise for all of
you that have subscribed to this show.
and I'm very excited to deliver that for
you. The production's going to change.
We're going to go even further with our
guests and we're going to tell even more
global stories. So, as always, if you
appreciate what we're doing here, the
simple free favor I'll ask from you is
to hit the subscribe button. Let's get
on with the episode. [music]
[music]
Dr. Paul Conti on the front of your book
it says trauma the invisible epidemic.
Why did you use those two words
invisible and epidemic?
Mhm. [clears throat]
Well, as a practicing psychiatrist, what
I started seeing over and over and over
again is that the the root cause of the
vast majority of what I was treating,
whether it was depression or addiction
or panic, that that ultimately the root
of it was trauma. That if we traced
back, what we would learn is that there
was something that had happened in that
person's life. it could have been acute
or it could have been chronic over time
but that changed their brain so that the
brain is then different going forward
and that is the root of the problem. So
from that sense I I could see there's an
epidemic because this is behind what is
ailing us right the the 50% or more of
complaints to general medical doctors
are coming from mental health right
these are general physical medical
medicine doctors so you imagine how much
of what is going on inside of us is
affecting our health so the the epidemic
of trauma is touching us in so many ways
but we're not identifying it we're
identifying different illnesses is for
example like oh that that person uh has
depression that person has
cardiovascular disease and had a heart
attack right but those things may be
linked including autoimmune diseases all
aspects of mental and physical health
but we're not seeing that at the heart
of it is the trauma that then changes us
and our brains and our bodies are
different as we move forward. So to
start seeing this commonality that this
is everywhere and we're not identifying
it because one of the impacts of trauma
is to make a reflexive sense of guilt
and shame in us. So then we sort of hide
things away. So we're changed made less
healthier and the the very trauma itself
leads us to have a tendency to keep it
inside to not share to not get help to
not do the kinds of things that would
lead us to recognize the epidemic. How
many people have some form of trauma?
Because when we think of trauma,
sometimes people think of PTSD, soldiers
coming back from war.
So, how many people does this subject
speak to in some way? The numbers and
estimates vary, but it'd be hard to
imagine you wouldn't have roughly one in
five. I mean likely you have more than
that. But if you look at, you know, data
across demographics and data for
occurrences of traumatic events and and
the impacts we see downstream of these
brain changes, we're talking about a
very significant portion of the
population. And then if you think of
people who are either experiencing the
post-trauma effects themselves, right,
the changes to themselves or
experiencing those changes through
someone close to them, through someone
they love, a parent, a child, a
significant other. Right now, we're
we're well over half the population that
will that will experience a significant
and negative life impact from something
that either was with high likelihood
avoidable or treatable. In other words,
change
for the worse. That doesn't have to be
that way. And again, it's not just as if
just mental health were saying something
small. I mean, mental health is how we
interface with the world, but it's our
bodies, too. It's is that person going
to get lupus? Is that person going to
have a heart attack or a stroke? And how
rapidly is that person aging? So, we
know that trauma by this definition that
changes us because our coping mechanisms
are overwhelmed makes us age faster than
our calendar age. So, you can say, well,
that person is 40 years old by the
calendar, but they're really 46, right?
That person is 65, but really 73. If you
look at the aging that occurs in us as a
result of trauma. So if you I say this
in part to to really speak to how like
concrete and real this is. So something
that happens and changes you so that you
are actually older than your calendar
age closer to death right than the
calendar might suggest is is is so real
and so tangible. And it's this is the
effect of trauma upon us. And and modern
science knows this. modern neurobiology,
modern psychiatry. The research around
us tells us this, but the things that we
know aren't always at the forefront of
our consciousness in society, which is a
reason I think it's so important to
spread the word about it.
Why does this matter so much to you?
I had a youngest brother who died by
suicide when he was 20 years old. I was
in my mid uh 20s which which had um um
just a a terrible effect upon the family
structure and upon me and I and I felt
the reflexive sense of of guilt and
shame without really being aware of it.
I hadn't felt that before. You know, I
hadn't felt like I couldn't be in the
world or make my way forward in the
world. And I started feeling very very
different about myself. And I started
behaving in ways that weren't healthy.
You know, that were very unhealthy.
drinking too much, unhealthy friendships
and relationships and real change in me
that I was fortunate to be able to get
help for. Um, that really
brought to the surface how much had
changed after the trauma that I felt
very different about myself in the
world. So cursed and maybe our family
was cursed and I couldn't make my way
forward and bad things were always going
to happen and it was the realization
that like I'm really different and this
is not okay. And it wasn't like just
grief, you know, in the sense that
sadness and loss of course were were a
huge part of that, but but realizing
also like I am different. And you know,
that had a very big effect on me. Um
both the depression and the the the the
issues in him that weren't seen and
addressed that led to his suicide and
then the downstream effect on the rest
of us. And that led me to to leave.
believe I had a business career and I
went back to college and took some
pre-med classes and went to medical
school and then became very interested
in psychiatry and and and in brain
function both the psychology of how we
think and the the brain biology that
underpins how we think and have been
very much fascinated uh ever since.
Did you process and or deal with the
loss of your younger brother Jonathan by
suicide at the time?
No. No. at at the time I just went
inside like people didn't talk about it
and were overwhelmed and you know I
became less healthy and felt different
about the world but there wasn't an
outlet for talking about it just wasn't
though how I had grown up like there
there wasn't a way people would say
let's check in like how are you doing
and maybe you should see someone like
like it didn't happen and and it took a
it took until I realized like hey I'm
kind of in trouble here I need to get
some help to then you know I had an
insurance card and to look on the back
and say like oh maybe I should go talk
to someone but that was a stretch for me
and I felt even embarrassed about doing
that. Like I I really didn't understand
neither what had happened nor how to
help myself and and then I went to
someone and and I just remember just how
amazing it was to just have her tell me
that, you know, I wasn't like it wasn't
sick or crazy or or like not going to be
okay because I felt this way. That like
she helped normalize what I was feeling
and and helped me put some of it into
perspective. And I realized like well
that was very basic what was just done
for me and you know many many many
people do not get that and I almost
didn't have it myself and I was I was
very struck by it and by how much of a
difference it made to have a better
understanding and get some help.
The impact it had on the rest of your
family. I was reading that your mother
was depressed for the rest of her life
almost because of potentially because of
that incident.
Mhm. Yeah. I think she was clearly
different afterwards too and and was
much more isolated again in hindsight
it's so clear to see but I think the
guilt and shame that she felt um was was
overwhelming and she was not able to get
help you know no matter how much
encouragement you know at some point I
it was actually a psychiatrist and still
couldn't you know couldn't get her to
get help because I think she was just
felt so ashamed and and felt that help
was inaccessible or that getting help
was even more shameful and you know the
patterns changed. I mean there were
still some happy times in her life but
the whole tenor changed and changed
towards towards progressively more
depression and it didn't have to be that
way either but there weren't support
resources for you know mothers who lose
a child to suicide and and my father who
is more extroverted you know then just
had more natural support mechanisms and
that's what you see sometimes that that
it shouldn't be that one person does
better than the other because they just
happen to have different proclivities
You know, but when we're not really
paying attention to this and we're just
kind of running forward, you know, and
trampling people, then maybe the person
who's a little more introverted in a
situation like that, a little more
inclined to be self-laming, you know,
like that's the person who doesn't do
okay. And, you know, my mother didn't
and and died, I think, much younger than
she should have of of cancer. But this
kind of trauma predisposes to the immune
system not functioning as it should. And
I can't say that this trauma caused her
early death by cancer, but but certainly
there there are a lot of scientific
reasons to think that um that it was
likely a factor in it. And again, unless
we're aware of like what trauma is and
what it's doing to us, that like we can
prevent it, we can identify it and treat
it, these changes to us don't have to
stay the same. Like the person who's
blaming themselves and ashamed and
depressed doesn't have to stay that way.
the person who's abusing a substance to
try and cope or to try and kill
themselves because they feel so bad. It
doesn't have to be living like that.
Like we really and truly can make
change. It's a person who has an
autoimmune disease or heart disease or
rheumatoid arthritis that's inflamed
after the trauma. Like everything is
worse after the trauma doesn't have to
be medically ill like that. like this
the the message I'm bringing is is one
based in hard science and it's one that
has a real message of change that it's
not an esoteric principle but we can and
should be healthier even you think about
more than 50% of complaints brought to
physical medicine doctors come from a
mental health perspective I mean how
much of that is based in trauma it's the
the majority of what is ailing us and
the numbers actually do tell us that
at the top of this conversation you
referred to aging and the impact that
trauma has on aging.
Mhm.
How does that work? So trauma makes me
older.
Mhm. Is there are there cellular
mechanisms in us? You know, people often
talk about ilamiras, which is one aspect
that change as we grow older because
we're very interested in figuring out
like why do we grow older, right? So
there are processes in us that sort of
mark time and that change across the
aging process of humans. Now again, we
don't understand everything about this.
If we did, we could change it and live
much much much longer. But we're trying
to understand about it. And and I think
science has made a lot of very
significant headway in understanding.
And part of that understanding is the
biological age of a person is different
from the calendar age. So if you you
know an example would be if you took two
identical twins at birth and you know
one of them is able to live in pretty
good circumstances and free of trauma
and you know has a pretty good life
going and the other person uh lives in a
way that has has privation and a lot of
trauma maybe direct physical assault or
seeing seen as less than denigrated by
society. It's a theoretical example, but
the idea would be you you go follow them
30, 40, 50 years later and you you find
two people who are not the same age
anymore, right? The person who had the
better life, if they're 40, well,
they're 40. And if you match up cellular
aging mechanisms, and again, we don't
know how close a person is to death, but
the aging mechanisms are telling us how
far along our path we are, so to speak.
You see, okay, that kind of matches with
being that person's age. But then you
see the person who has been through so
much trauma. The presumption here being
there are the brain changes of trauma.
There's a post-trauma syndrome that that
person is going to actually be older in
terms of how far they have traversed
down that path of the machinery in them
running itself forward than what the
calendar tells you.
Trying to figure out why and how that's
happening. What is the mechanism that's
causing them to apparently accelerate in
age?
So the the less healthy environment
within the person. So some of that is is
likely say the signaling molecules that
we we talked about. It's just not as you
know the bloodstream isn't as as clean
and healthy and you know running in as
locked up a fashion as we might want.
But there are inflammatory signaling
markers and you know that impacts
cellular function and cells are more
likely to die earlier than they might
otherwise and and elements of
neurotransmission and anxiety and
tension states within us. you know, it's
it's really environmental. One, you
know, one set of aging machinery is in a
healthy environment and the other isn't.
So, it's going to deteriorate more
quickly. I mean, it's it's one way of
kind of trying to capture that the
environment is is very different in
those two people. So how what is
functioning in that environment ages is
going to change like having a car maybe
in a in a a nice warm dry environment
you know versus having a car where you
know there's snow and ice six months of
the year and then it's terribly hot the
other 6 months you know that it's going
to be different it's going to age
differently so to speak right if you go
look at those two cars 10 years later
and to some extent it's like that in us
too
death disease and trauma a 2021 1 study
by the British Medical Journal found
that adults who experienced sexual abuse
by the age of 16 have 2.6 times the
chance of dying in middle age than those
who didn't experience it. It's not
commonly believed that trauma can result
in disease, like physical disease
directly, but you argue that it can. And
you also talk about how it can result in
neur um autoimmune disorders, things
like arthritis,
um Crohn's disease,
Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis,
Parkinson's disease probably has an
autoimmune component. I mean, we're
learning that much, much more is
autoimmune. So,
do you believe that trauma is the
underlying reason behind many diseases
that lead to early death?
Absolutely. You think about what you
just read. Can we can we take a look at
that again? Like, I think what you just
read is absolutely momentous. So, think
about that. Sexual assault in the teen
years
leads to a two and a halffold increase
in death risk. That's staggering.
What's causing that? the whole cascade
from the biological to the behavioral.
So gene transcription has changed.
Healthier genes are more likely to be
off. Unhealthier genes are more likely
to be on. That's not good for our blood
vessels. That's not good for heart
disease or possibility of having a
stroke. And the immune system is more
activated and more likely to attack
itself. And some of the mechanisms
within us that are protective against
cancers, for example, are less likely to
function. All of those things change
biologically. Neurotransmission,
endocrine function, signaling markers in
the bloodstream, all of that is
changing. And at the same time,
behaviors are changing. Higher risks of
depression, higher risks of addiction,
higher risks of impulsive behaviors,
risk-taking behaviors. You have to put a
lot of things together before you get a
death risk that is two and a half times
higher. But that's how we get there
because it does put a lot of things
together from the genes all the way
through to complex risky behavioral
taking.
Do you think there's anything killing
more people than trauma fundamentally?
[sighs]
Not if we look for root cause. I've seen
many many things that kill people. And I
I wrote about this in the book of people
that I was taking care of who at times
died. And I was always so struck by what
the death certificate said versus why
they had really died, you know. So the
death certificate might have said car
accident. Okay, understand that. But why
was that person driving 120 m an hour in
bad conditions or why were they being so
reckless? Why they had five car
accidents? I know that's the trauma,
right? Why? Well, it's a heart attack.
Why did that person have a heart attack
when they were 62? right? They didn't
have huge risk factors from other any
way except the trauma and its impact.
And the so if we're looking at root
cause analysis of what is hurting us,
what is hurting our quality of life,
what is hurting the quality of life of
people that we love and what is killing
us. I think that need we know more than
even just that. And and there's so much
we could we could pile the information a
mile high that supports that piece of
information which I think is quite
staggering. What are the different types
of trauma? Are there sort of different
categorizations of of trauma from like
small to big or
if we're if we're using the definition
that trauma is anything that overwhelms
our coping mechanisms? So, so there
there are changes in the brain when our
coping mechanisms are overwhelmed and on
the other side of that our brains are
different. So that's the biological
definition. Then we would look at well
how how do we how do we get there right
and and we it breaks down into three
categories then of acute chronic or
vicarious. So the acute trauma is how
we've traditionally seen trauma. So if
you think about the idea that people
were shell shocked after World War I
right that was acute trauma combat
trauma. So our traditions of looking at
trauma come from acute trauma and it's
just more evident you know after someone
dies or there's an injury or there's a
car accident like you know we can see
that oh okay gosh that could what makes
some difference in the in the person
like we can kind of get that and
sometimes we can see the change in the
person from before and after. So we have
tended to equate trauma and post-t
trauma syndromes like what happens to us
after those changes in the brain are now
with us to acute trauma. But but again
it's not a soft definition. It's based
on do those changes in the brain happen
in other ways. And the answer to that is
yes. That if a person is seen as less
than for example in a society for
whatever reason across time or even
within a household a person is being
abused in a household a child is being
neglected or a child is being
emotionally or physically abused.
Bullied at school.
Sure. Bullied at school. Absolutely.
Right. This over so so nothing happens
all at once. Right. But that brain
changes just the same. So it's a
scientific definition of traumatic
change and it is true in situations of
chronic trauma just as it is in acute
trauma. Now it doesn't mean all acute
traumas or all chronic traumas make
these changes in the brain and then
vicarious. to the third category there
would be vicarious trauma which means
human beings are empathic right I mean
thank thank thank goodness right that's
how all goodness comes in the world
through our ability to have empathic
connection but that also means that our
trauma can communicate from one to
another and again it's not a soft
concept so people who are very much
involved in other people's trauma so in
healthc care settings sometimes in in
journalism settings just in intimate
home settings in just spending a a lot
of time with the news, right? Can become
traumatized and have the changes in the
brain that look the same as the person
who lost two family members in the car
accident. So, it is true that vicarious
trauma can change us in just the same
way. The the modern field acknowledges
that if it's in the context of
professional endeavors, which it clearly
makes no sense, right? What we're
talking about are brain changes. And
brain changes can come through acute
trauma, chronic trauma, or vicarious
trauma because of our ability to have
empathic connection and compassion with
other humans.
I want to make sure that I've nailed
this before we move on. So the acute
trauma, I get it. It's the the big
events. It's the going to war. It's the
car accident. Big events that happen
typically in an instant. Mhm.
Typically chronic trauma, this is things
like racism, sexism, bullying that
happen over a long period of time
gradually that make you often feel less
than
than other people. And the vicarious
trauma is the trauma that as you say you
get from empathy. So feeling someone
else's pain, feeling someone else's
trauma and it becomes your own.
Yes.
Okay.
Yes. And they can all lead us to the
same brain changes. But people have
different levels of susceptibility,
right? So one person may have three big
acute traumas and that person's brain is
still doing okay right it's not changed
towards greater vigilance right it's not
changed toward towards greater
inflammation in their blood vessels then
you know another person could have one
incident that might seem more mild than
the other three the person and that
person can then have brain changes so
part of is who are we genetically how
are we built uh what kind of life
experience have we had especially early
life experience. Uh how susceptible are
we to one thing versus another? And then
this idea of the multiple hit hypothesis
that I could have a number of traumas
and then on a certain trauma that might
be even mild compared to ones that came
before it now it makes the changes.
What is that a hypothesis?
So that multiple hit which which which
says that this idea that what what
doesn't kill us makes us stronger is
completely wrong. I mean in absolutely
every way what what doesn't kill us
often makes us weaker, right? And that's
why we have to be attentive to what
hurts us but doesn't kill us so that we
don't get weaker, we get stronger. But
what can happen is we can become more
susceptible to the more likely that the
next trauma if we experience one will
then create the brain changes.
Cuz I often wondered I'm the youngest of
four kids. We all grew up in the same
household. We experienced a variety of
different traumas in my opinion. Much of
it was chronic again being the only
black family in an all-white area. All
these kinds of things. But I thing I've
always reflected on is for some reason I
think I experienced it much more the
trauma of that than my older siblings
and I've pondered whether that's because
of the timeline being the youngest it
was worse in the later years. So I I
think my hypothesis has been that I
experienced it more than my siblings
and I think I've embodied the shame a
lot more than my siblings have. Yet we
both went through the same thing. So
for whatever reason I'm like really like
I'm a workaholic and I'm exceptionally
driven. not that my siblings are, but
I'm obsessed in a way that's probably
not completely healthy.
And I look at my siblings and I go,
they're not [__] up in the same way
that I am, but we all went through the
same thing.
Part of what you're pointing out is that
the the variables of life matter, right?
So circumstances are different, say for
one child in formative years than for
another, th those children could be
affected differently, like economic
circumstances. So some of it may be and
and probably is impacted by the things
that you're saying, but there probably
are almost surely other factors too this
kind of nature and nurture that people
have what sometimes gets called
different levels of attunement of the of
the emotional compass. So, you know,
some people are very sensitive and
sensitized to things and very aware of
what's going on around them and and
aware of their own feeling states and,
you know, and other people can kind of
go through life and, you know,
emotionally buffeting things can happen,
but they kind of keep going, you know,
and and look, there are pros and cons to
both of those ways of being, but the
person with the sort of more finely
attuned emotional compass is the person
who's likely to to register more things
that are negative, like things like
subtle expressions of prejudice. right?
That that someone with a less attuned
compass may just, you know, kind of not
see that or just doesn't make it, you
know, into their conscious awareness.
Whereas someone else who would be very
attuned might see a lot of those things.
So it's this part like what is the
nature like who is the person right and
then what is the nurture meaning like
what are the variables you know that
that that seed sort of falls into as we
go through life. You must have seen this
a lot in your practice where an
individual went through a really
traumatic early event
and you've got the person in your
practice sat in front of you that is an
alcoholic. They are experiencing sort of
suicidal thoughts but then when you look
at the rest of the family the family are
just doing fine
to some whatever that means fine but
right well funny to look at is the rest
of the family doing fine because
sometimes what it seems like on the
outside is not true on the inside. Uh
and then we do think about genetics
especially around alcoholism. There are
um we don't understand all of it of
course but but there are genetic factors
that can be very impactful. Uh then
we'll look at personality structure you
know is that person built to sort of
internalize or externalize blame you
know so why alcohol for this person and
not for someone else how much is nature
or nurture and how much may be
formative. It may be that for example
that person was in social circumstances
just real example that happens with some
frequency say mid to late teens where
alcohol was accepted as a way of coping
right and and maybe other people in the
family weren't this circumstances were
just different where they went to school
was different what and and they didn't
have it modeled for them that this is
how they cope so maybe there genetic
factors that that push more towards
alcoholism maybe there are social
factors right that was modeled for that
person. So you you put can put those
things together and which is why we
follow patterns and there's a science
underlying all of this but we have to
look at who is that person right because
you have to look at you know the the
family history so the genetics that may
have been passed on and what does that
seem like may be the case in the person
how can you be informed by that and what
were their formative life experiences
and you start we start to build a
picture of what's going on inside of us
so that we can understand and change by
looking at our history which is mental
health doesn't often do this. You know,
it takes an inventory of your symptoms
now to reflexively prescribe a medicine,
right? So, we we need to understand
ourselves if we're going to understand
whether trauma is afflicting us, how
it's afflicting us, how we can prevent
it, how we can treat it if it's there.
And and I think that means accepting
that this is real and this is real
science, which which actually when you
were talking it made me think of an
example. Look, if I say it an example to
the science of it, one one of the
earlier studies and I forget exactly how
many years ago this was, but 15 or 20
years maybe was looking at immigrants. I
believe they were immigrants from
Somalia to Holland, I think I'm
remembering that correctly. And and so
the incidence of schizophrenia in the
human population is about 1%. across the
human population. But when stressors are
higher, right, it they can predispose
people to to having to coming down
having the syndrome of schizophrenia. So
it's about 1% of the population, but
it's not evenly distributed if there
are, you know, people in sort of
pressure cooker environment, so to
speak, become more susceptible. And so
they looked at at immigrants who
integrated into the community in Holland
versus immigrants who lived in primarily
immigrant communities and the incidence
of schizophrenia was higher in the
people who had integrated. Right? So the
thought is and again there have been
subsequent studies and we don't know for
sure but the the when you kind of look
at that say what what is that is the
feeling of otherness right is is
different trying to integrate into a
society that was looking at you know not
everyone in that society of course but
there was a much more pervasive sense of
otherness when people were integrating
than when they were living in the
communities where food and dress and
like the day-to-day of life was
normalized. What's otherness and what's
the sort of cost of otherness?
I think otherness in the way I'm
defining is a sense of difference in a
way that's not good, right? A sense of
difference in a way that involves either
being seen as less than. And again,
sometimes it can be overt prejudice, but
it can be also stratification of
opportunity. You know, just seeing that
okay, like in some way I'm not on an
equal I don't feel on an equal footing
here, right? And then that there's a
there's can be a sense of isolation
there that that builds the sense of
otherness then say building tension
inside the person right the person
doesn't feel quite as safe right it
doesn't feel quite as validated because
you know especially when we're young we
look around us to see what's normal and
if you know people are looking talking
dressing like us like we just feel
validated in ways that we might not feel
if we see that we are different
especially if the difference isn't
embraced right and we see this across
immigrant communities ities who you know
at some point integrate right but
initially people will tend more to stay
together because there's there's a sense
of validation in the community um so
then the children often then will will
integrate right which is why it's such
an interesting study to look at people
who were first generation immigrants who
would be likely to feel very strongly
you know whether they were integrated or
whether they were somewhere different
because they weren't the subsequent
generations right they're the generation
that just come from the home culture
culture that either they could still
sort of live in or
live in a new culture. And not that
everyone felt a pervasive sense of
otherness, but there's more of that
sense of otherness. And the fact that
that would change susceptibility to an
illness that otherwise is it distributes
itself across the population, I think is
a very profound, you know, marker of
scientific proof upon the things we
don't pay attention to as much. you
know, subtle prejudices,
discriminations, whatever they may be
that are in our society that we kind of
look the other way and don't see. We're
really harming people who then can come
to the that come to the adult phase of
life in in a place where we have
marginalized them and we've we've made
things different inside of them that
makes it harder to make their way in the
world. And I think we overlook very much
whether it's bullying. There's many many
things that can be based upon what can
make people feel less than. But the
effect of it is is seen in actual brain
biology. And like we know this and we've
known this for a long time. But in some
ways I see that we're more fragmented
and pushing more towards these
experiences of otherness or experiences
of vulnerability and lack of safety that
push people towards the the the chronic
aspects of of traumatic brain change.
When we think about trauma, we often
focus on childhood, but what you're
saying now with this study of the
Somalians that immigrated to Europe um
presumably those who are adults.
Yes. So the the highest incidence of
schizophrenia is in people who are in
young adulthood. So, so we're not seeing
changes in people who are already deep
into adulthood, but the but the the
changes that we're seeing is in this
sort of transition to to adulthood,
which honors both that yes, we are much
more impressionable in all sorts of
ways, including how our brains are
forming when we are younger. So the so
these are people still their brains
still have enough formative the idea is
the thought would be they have enough
formative processes going on in their
brains that the brains can be changed by
the trauma. But when we talk about these
three types of trauma, the acute,
chronic and vicarious, can you
experience these types of trauma in any
age phase chapter of life?
Yes. The earlier in the the lifespan,
the the more impactful.
Okay.
Yes. Absolutely. Which is why childhood
trauma is so important. In my in the
book, I uh interview um Darren
Richarder, who's a psychiatrist at
Sanford and Stephanie Von Gutenberg,
who's a a child wellness advocate,
because we're talking about trauma from
both ends of the spectrum. So the the
chapter that's the interview with
Stephanie von Gutenberg talks about how
childhood trauma so deeply impacts the
the sense of self of the child like
things that we know but I dedicate a
chapter to it because childhood trauma
is so tremendously
impactful and again we don't pay enough
attention to helping children who are
traumatized and to to to projecting
ahead to the increased burdens of
illness and decreased role poor
performance and all the awful things
that happen. So, so childhood trauma is
one thing. On the other end of the
spectrum, Dr. Richarder's work has
highlighted the fact that when people
are traumatized, they are changed in
ways that changes subsequent
generations. So, if we're talking about
childhood trauma, we can talk about
traumatized children. We can also talk
about traumatized adults whose trauma
changes their children even if their
children are not born until years later.
How do we know that trauma can and is
being passed on? What is the best
evidence we have to support that? So the
field of epigenetics which has really
come to the so so epi epigenetics really
come to the forefront in the last two to
three decades which is the understanding
that our life experiences can change the
expression of our genes. So so
you or I may have a gene that is active
now because we inherited an active gene
for example and then maybe that gene is
producing something. it's it's helping
us in some way, bolstering mood,
decreasing anxiety, then something can
happen, something can change in us that
turns off the expression of that gene or
it turns on the expression of another
gene. So then even though you have that
gene, you don't have the benefit of it
because the gene has been turned off.
And and this is a very I mean it's a
very revolutionary understanding that
it's not just well your genes are your
genes. You know, we could look when
sperm and egg come together. Well,
that's telling us what's going on. And
if we could understand that fully, we
would see, oh, here's the array of genes
that are active and the array of genes
that are not active. But like, that's
not the story, right? That's just part
of the story. The the the story
continues that that one's experiences of
life changes how those genes function,
which ones are on, which ones are off,
and how they get passed along. So if the
parent is not traumatized, the parent
may pass along the active gene for
something positive, say, to the child.
If the child then is traumatized, the
child may pass on that gene without it
being expressed. So it's as if the gene
isn't passed on. So if you you think
about that, it's just amazing that our
genetics in the sense of what's actually
going on in us is not just the nature of
what genes did we get, it's the nurture.
How has what has happened to us affected
the expression of those genes?
There's one study that I I read about
which says scientists at Emory
University in Atlanta trained male mice
to fear the smell of cherry blossom,
shocking them whenever they smelled it.
So the mice got to the point where they
shuddered when they smelled it, even
when they weren't even being shocked. Um
the and I'm guessing the children then
had that the same reaction. I guess
that's what the study concludes. But
also the um the children of Holocaust
survivors are another example of how
trauma can be passed on because
yes
it's hard to think of a much more
traumatic event than being involved in
the Holocaust.
Right. And for a long time the thought
was that the the reason that say
children of Holocaust survivors had
higher levels of anxiety and of anxiety
spectrum illnesses was because of
anxious parenting. that understandably
the the parents had a much more sense of
vulnerability, you know, so so across
the population they were they were more
anxious and they were raising the
children with more anxiety. And what we
have have learned is that that the
experiential aspect is part of it, but
that exactly what you and I are talking
about is part of it too because the the
experience of what they went through
changed genetic expression in the
children, right? So that's that's just a
sea change in understanding that the the
genes of the parents, the genetic
expression of the parents and the
genetic expression that they pass along
to their children is changed by the
Holocaust experience itself.
With this understanding of epigenetics,
do you in your practice then consider
deeply what someone's parents went
through in their life and how that might
have changed someone's sort of genetic
expression that's sat in front of you in
your practice?
Sure. Sure. I I think we all deserve so
to speak to to think about our life
narrative, right? And and so many of us
don't. I think if we're trying to help
ourselves, you know, whether someone
listening to this like feels that
they're depressed or that they they
don't have any mental health issue, but
they want to understand themselves
better. It's like think about a
narrative of okay, where let me start
with like where have I come from and
like who came before me? And um and then
wait this happened and then that
happened and when we build a narrative
it's remarkable how much we can come to
understand about ourselves cuz often we
don't do that like we have isolated
pieces of information about ourselves
but we don't knit it all together and
and it's really remarkable what can
happen what can be elucidated by doing
that. So absolutely yes just for the the
general understanding of the person and
also to understand what did the parents
go through you know what what
experiences did they have how might that
impact this person and you might then
ask questions of let's say the family
situation changed you know between say
uh older siblings and younger siblings
right then by learning about that
history and learning about older
siblings versus younger siblings and the
parents I mean think about how much you
learn then not just about the person's
experience appearances growing up, but
but just about the the biological
aspects of how were the parents
functioning, how did it impact the
children, and what were the situations,
how were the children similar or
different. There's so much we can learn
from that. You liken trauma to a virus.
It's a very interesting way for us to
start thinking about trauma because we
seem to think of it, at least I did, as
being sort of isolated to the person,
but the idea that it somewhat has a
contagion to it and that we can spread
it variously to other people that are
around us, but also
down through the family tree via our
epigenetics and via our genes
makes you kind of understand both the
importance of treating it. But yeah,
I've just never heard anyone describe it
as a virus before, right?
Yeah. you know, because there's a
reflexive guilt and shame to trauma and
our society doesn't recognize it, it
often gets hidden inside the person,
right? But when it's hidden inside the
person, it's still spinning off
symptoms. So, I think the best analogy
to use here is of an abscess in the
body. So, an abscess is a walled off
area of infection in the body. And it's
good that the infection is walled off
because if if it weren't, it could be
fatal, right? So, it's good that it's
walled off, but the body is still aware
that it's there and it's still spinning
off symptoms because it's there. So, for
example, a person might have an
intermittent low-grade fever or just
feel kind of jittery or, you know,
they're sweating and they're not
sleeping well, right? So, there are
pervasive symptoms that are impacting
this person, but it's not obvious that
the abscess is there, right? So what
often happens in general medicine is
person is having non-specific symptoms
you know people go looking scan they see
oh there's an abscess there right once
we know that then we might have an
understanding for why that person this
never feels good right they always feel
lethargic or they never feel comfortable
we know there's something there now and
we can go in and fix it right and it
involves you know there's a surgical
process right so something has to happen
that's not a fun thing right if you go
through surgery and recovery now the
absess is gone so I think the the
example of the abscess in the body is is
a very good way to understand what
trauma does to us in the mind. So if we
shove it down inside of us, there's
reflexive guilt and shame. Society isn't
helping us take a look at it. Now it's
there inside of us. It's going to spin
off symptoms. And those symptoms aren't
always symptoms that makes a one person
hurtful to another. They they they may
not. That person may be very very
vigilant and and just kind as can be to
to someone else. But across the
population, those symptoms inside of us
are not good. So they give us shorter
tempers, right? We're more likely we're
more anxious. So we may be more quick to
anger or we're less functional in the
world around us because of depression,
anxiety, sleep problems, right? We can
be more impulsive. like it works against
us being in the world as best we can be.
Is that is that what you refer to as
post-t trauma syndromes? Is that a
similar thing?
Yeah, because post-traum syndromes are
ways in which we can recognize the
changes in ourselves. So, higher levels
of anxiety, for example, lower uh levels
of mood, right? Um different changes in
sleep, uh physical health changes, um
and then changes in just how comfortable
we feel in the world, right? So what
we'll see is changes in behaviors that
are driven by just feeling differently
in the world. So we have we're in a
different self states. We have different
behaviors. The syndromes can do all
sorts of different things to us from
mood, anxiety, sleep, behavioral change.
So someone who might want to find a
relationship partner, you know, stops
going to places where they could meet
someone, right? So we we change our
behaviors. This is what shows us that
there is a post-t trauma syndrome.
That's how we know we're traumatized
effectively because that's what I'm
trying to figure out. Helic people will
be listening to this now and hearing you
talk about these different types of
trauma. What are the sort of telltale
signs? I'm assuming it's this that I am
traumatized, right? Yeah. This is what
we're looking for, right? So, so someone
might present with uh that person is
depressed now and they weren't before.
That person is having panic attacks and
they weren't before. That person is
using alcohol to soothe and they weren't
before. Because in medicine we look at
just the surface, right? What we want to
look at is like, oh, why are you here?
Oh, you're here because you're drinking
too much. Let's talk about how you can
drink less. You're here because you're
depressed. What can we give you a
depression medicine? Right? So, we're
not looking at like why, right? Why are
you depressed? I mean, some people
biologically will become depressed, you
know, no matter what, even when things
are going very very well. But this isn't
the majority, right? Most most of us, if
we're depressed, there are likely
factors like so we should be curious.
Why is that person depressed? Why is
that person having panic attacks? Why
has that person changed their behaviors?
Right? And so now if we get curious, we
get curious about the person, then we're
going to figure we're going to figure
out things we wouldn't have before,
right? So if a person gets depressed
because everyone in their family gets
depressed every 9 to 12 months no matter
what, like okay, let's let's come at
that biologically. We don't that that
doesn't necessarily map to trauma,
right? But but if we start looking at
that person being depressed, do we see
that you they kind of started getting
depressed you know a couple of years ago
around the time their sleep started
being a little bit different and you
know they started behaving differently
and they you know they didn't spend as
much time with family or then you start
getting more curious and and you start
learning oh you something happened then
right again with acute traumas it's
easiest to see but when you look for the
whole picture of like might there be a
post-trauma syndrome
going on here. You know, maybe that
person who's depressed and is drinking
too much started drinking too much when
their mood started decreasing after the
trauma. Or maybe they started drinking
after the trauma and it's driving their
mood down. Like, and it's not always
this, but we're never going to know and
understand unless we're curious like
this is how we trace to the roots of it.
And this is how we get back to the
narrative, right, of of what is going on
inside of me and have I changed, right?
And the idea we started talking about
how the changes in behavior of the
post-trauma syndrome are the changes
that that make trauma like like a virus
because we start behaving differently
and for some people that is the the the
mood isn't as good and it's not as
healthy to be raised by a parent who's
depressed right so that can be a way in
which the virus of trauma gets passed
along to the next generation or maybe
that person is drinking or using a drug
to cope and that doesn't make for the
less parenting. That's how the virus of
trauma gets passed down to the next
generation. Or there are times when when
a reaction to trauma to the feeling of
disempowerment can be aggression and
envious aggressive behavior. So so not
all abuse of children comes through the
lens of trauma, but a lot of it does.
I'm interested as well in the subtle
symptoms of trauma. You know, we talked
about some of the big picture stuff,
which is like suicidality, you know,
becoming an alcoholic or all those kinds
of things, but the subtle ways that
trauma shows up in everyday life.
I was some of them I was hypothesizing
over are things like
phone addiction, being addicted to your
phone or video game addictions. These
kind of things that I think
maybe originate from the sort of more
chronic traumas, but are less easy to
spot.
Right. Right. Yeah. I think the key to
all of this is curiosity. Right. So
let's say someone is like addicted to
their phone. Okay, maybe that's because
phones are addictive and the person just
spent too much time on their phone.
Maybe, right? But addiction mechanisms
in human beings are similar like it's
the same machinery across addictions,
right? And and often times addictive
behavior is meant as an escape from
something or to soothe against something
or even to self-punish because of
something. So addictive behaviors, it's
similar brain machinery, whether it's
cocaine, it's alcohol, it's brownies,
it's the telephone, it's sex, it's
exercise. I mean, there are things that
people do in addictive ways as routes of
unhealthy coping. So, so if we get
curious, why again, why the drug, why
the phone addiction, why the things that
might seem more subtle um and maybe are
more subtle, but we should scratch on
the surface of them to to try and
understand if they mean something. Is
that phone addiction the 14th addictive
behavior in a row? Right? Because that
person has sort of particularly adept
addictive machinery inside of them and
they're trying to escape from something
like that doesn't happen all the time.
But it is not untrue that when you
scratch the surface of that, you might
learn about an episode of sexual abuse
that happened when the person was a
child. Like these are real examples,
right? and that the person isn't built
to run from things through addiction.
And maybe they're saying things about
their own character that's negative.
They're saying negative things about
themselves and they feel disempowered
and they're disempowering themselves.
But if you go look at that narrative,
you know that that person that might
have a dialogue running over and over
again in their head of shame about
something that happened 30, 40 years
ago. Like this is not uncommon. So we
need to be curious and we need to
scratch on the surface of things whether
they're really big things or they're
subtle things like which is why a life
narrative is so important. If you think
about changes like after trauma that
changes the brain we respond differently
when we see a new face. So, so without
the trauma is I'm simplifying a little
bit but you see a new face we might be
curious like oh you know could you be a
friend or if someone's romantically
interested like oh my might that person
like me or my people are interested and
curious whereas after trauma there's
there's a difference of feeling a little
bit on the back foot. So people tend
less to look up and engage and more to
look away or to more have negative
thoughts. Oh you don't that person
doesn't like me you know instead of
something that might be con more more
constructive. How do they test for this?
Is there tests that are able to be done
to see if someone after trauma has like
a different set of sunglasses that they
view the world with?
Mhm. Yes. Yeah. There there's there
tests from from the brain biology uh all
the way through to to very clever
psychological experiments like we can
see all of this and it's these these
signs we should be looking for in
ourselves, right? Because it is very
obvious if someone who always was an
extrovert now won't leave the house,
right? like we can tell something's
wrong and someone's probably going to
come ask something, right? But if we
just change in these more subtle ways
where we're just less interactive and,
you know, people notice their friends a
little bit different and less outgoing,
it's these things that, as you're
saying, the subtle ones, the subtle
signs and the nuances are often very
impactful and indicative of other things
going on under the surface, you know,
that can bring even greater problems. On
this subject of soothing that you were
talking about a second ago, there's this
quote that you say in your book. Trauma
promotes pain. Pain increases suffering
and suffering makes us desperate to soo
our pain, whatever form it takes. Sadly,
we're seeing the terrible cycle play out
on a larger societal level with the
opiate epidemic.
Yes,
this idea of soothing. We all find ways
to soo ourselves and some of those ways
that we find to soo ourselves become
destructive in and of themselves. And it
almost makes me think that like our
sometimes our attempt we think of like
alcoholism typically as people that are
self-destructing but when you understand
the soothing component of drinking
alcohol it actually is them trying to
not self-destruct not destroy themselves
but to take care of themselves
right
in a weird way. If we're under huge
amounts of distress, our perspective of
the world narrows, right, very, very
dramatically. I mean, if there's an
elephant standing on my foot, I only
have one thing I'm guessing I would
think about, which is the elephant not
standing on my foot anymore, right? So,
when we're under tremendous stress and
strain, right? Something that soothes us
in the short term, right, becomes
acceptable because there's a desperation
in us that has us focused on the short
term. Like I know that I know that's not
good in the long term, but I'm just
trying to get through today, right? And
and it's this lack of perspective in the
world, in the society around us, that if
we're not recognizing what trauma does
to us, can it that it can drive us to
places of desperation? That is it any
wonder that short-term soothing will
have a big appeal to us? And that could
be soo soothing through excess eating.
And now you know that person is
overweight and has diabetes and wants to
be healthier but like doesn't really
feel that they can stop and ping pongs
back on different diets and you know
what they're really doing is they
learned self soothing with food in in a
way that that was you know in the
context of really feeling some sense of
despair or desperation the same way that
person may have learned that oh alcohol
soothes. Now again there's there are
genetic factors and there are all sorts
of factors that come into play too but
unhealthy coping mechanisms are
beckoning to us all the time which is
why you know I did a lot of treatment of
of opiates and opiate dependence uh over
a number of years and you know it's just
outrageous to me that these these are
the most powerful psychoactive medicines
on earth right opiates right they soothe
psychic distress like you know feeling
not good mentally inside of us very very
rapidly and effectively and almost
immediately start building tolerance and
danger. Right? But I had no education
and training around opiates as
psychoactive medicines. So so here we
are in a society that so is
underappreciating trauma and and where
people are are at in a a sense of
isolation or otherness or desperation in
so many facets of our society. And then
we start handing them the most powerful
short-term soothing mechanism with the
absolute highest risk of long-term
danger and death. And then we're
surprised that how many tens of
thousands of people die each year from
prescribed opiates.
What kind of opiates are people being
prescribed?
So how the opiate epidemic really began
was with opiates in pill form. So, so
that they would be prescribed say for
for conditions of pain, but conditions
of pain that were more chronic
conditions or conditions not so
amendable to opiate. So, if you come out
of surgery, an opiate is a great idea,
right? Like there's a lot of pain that
needs medicine to soo that pain until
the pain decreases. But it's judicious
use of a very powerful medicine in high
acuity circumstances. What we started
trying to do and part of this was, you
know, we know there's a whole story
behind the politics and the business of
this was to say, well, people shouldn't
be in pain. So, there's a short-term
solution, right? No one should be in
pain. We'll give them pills, right? And
opiates do not work in those situations.
They soothe a lot early on, but they
rapidly build tolerance, addiction, uh,
they suppress breathing drive. So, so we
started doing out opiate pills with the
idea that we're treating pain and isn't
that good, but with an absolute
inattention to the immense risks of
that. And I think it fits with the
short-term view of, you know, of
relieving all pain. Like we're human
beings. We can't relieve all of our
pain, right? Sometimes what there is to
do is to work hard to mitigate pain. And
that might be that might be pain, you
know, from a mental health perspective.
might be pain from a physical health
perspective. But this idea that a pill
is going to fix everything and now
everyone has pain pills and won't be in
pain, you know, has resulted in hundreds
of thousands of deaths in this country
alone from prescribed opiates, you know,
let alone illicit opiates. So there's
the short-term thinking on the part of
our society that then almost lures
people into the the seduction of the
short-term soothing, right? You feel
miserable and you want things to be
better, take this pill. Now you're
seduced and addicted and at huge risk.
And you know, we've let that happen.
For us to know how to treat trauma, we
have to understand the physiological
consequences of it. How does trauma
change our brain? When we look at brain
scans, what do we see in a traumatized
person?
Brain scan data is more complicated and
harder to interpret. You can see
different patterns in the brain. We're
not at the point where brain scan
science can really can pinpoint, right?
But what we do see is parts of the brain
that are sort of inflamed so to speak by
trauma. So the amygdala and pathways
around the amygdala which is a part of
the brain that gets called sometimes
grand central station for negative
emotion right we see that pathways
involving this part of the brain become
more prominent right so we we see
changes in brain connectivity right
because how our brains function is by
communicating from one place to another
they function through connectivity and
which pathways are more prominent so
what we see then is pathways that are
involved in trust say and feeling a
sense of safety are less prominent.
Pathways that are more activated when we
feel less safe and more vigilant are
more activated and then we see the
climate so to speak in the brain change
in a way that's less healthy. And you
may also see specific aspects of a
post-trauma syndrome. So, so mood
regulation areas are not functioning as
well because now there's depression
intruding. So we see patterns in the
brain that show us this change although
the science hasn't come far enough to to
pinpoint like at some point we'll be
able to do with much greater accuracy.
And I've heard you talk about how that
creates cognitive blind spots. So blind
spots in our brain following a traumatic
event. What do you mean by cognitive
blind spots and what's the the harm or
risk of that?
Right. So a cognitive blind spot can
occur when we take a lesson inside of us
that is a lesson of trauma not a lesson
of truth and then it changes how we may
think about things. So, so for example,
a real and sadly many examples of this I
that I can bring to mind in people's
faces who come to mind as I say it, but
someone who felt pretty good about
themselves and able to navigate the
world and uh striving for a better job
and doing fun things who then is
assaulted, right? And after that
assault, the person is much less present
in the world and internalizes a bunch of
different thoughts about themselves of I
don't really like being out. I like
being at home better or it never goes
well. I don't get along with other
people. Like they think about themselves
differently. So there's a cognitive
blind spot which makes it very very
difficult to think with accuracy about
say possibilities. So that person may
have say been striving for a better job,
right? But if they think of themselves
differently, I'm not the kind of person
who can get ahead and people don't
really like me, then they don't strive
for a better job. They just take for
granted that they can't get it. It won't
go well. They'll fail at it. But they
never thought that before. Is this what
you kind of see when people refer to
someone having daddy issues? The I was
thinking as you were saying that that my
dad left. So say my dad left when I was
four.
Mh. And I internalize this idea that men
don't love me, for example,
right?
And then I go through life being an
avoidant person in romantic situations
or self-sabotaging or going for people
that are unavailable to avoid the
rejection.
Is that somewhat similar? Like I've
created a cognitive blind spot and now
I'm living out that as an instruction
manual for my life.
Yes. Absolutely. Yes. And the the
earlier in life, the more powerful the
lesson is. And the brain doesn't go
[clears throat] back and revisit those
lessons. So I think this is this is just
so amazing and surprising to me that our
brains are so incredibly complex, right?
More complex than the greatest
supercomput, right? Yet our brains don't
do some very basic things like we don't
reboot and see is there a patch or is
there something to fix, right? We don't
go back and look at these earlier
lessons. So if you learn at age four, oh
men don't love me, that's a hard lesson
to unlearn because it gets solidified at
an early age and then once those lessons
are there, there's an internalized
danger to go revisit them. Like if you
go revisit that lesson, could you be
disappointed? Right? The thought is
that's the way it is and that's the way
it's going to be. Like that's kind of
what we tell ourselves inside. The
trauma kind of walls it off and then we
don't just go back and look and say, is
that really true? Like here I am. I'm an
adult now and know did I just carry
forward something when when I was four
years old that wasn't about me? Is it
really about the four-year-old, right?
Or is it about the adult? Like we learn
all these things, but we don't go back
and revisit the lesson. And then yes,
there's a person who could be very very
avoidant in ways that that lesson, that
quote unquote truth that is not true can
change that person's life. And that's
why if we go back and look at that, life
can really change. We can go back and
look at why do you feel that? It's
interesting to feel that. Let's let's
think about it and you know what's the
story behind it and we we can get to a
place where that can be undone and say
oh I took that lesson inside because
someone else made a choice that was
about them and not me. No four-year-old
is responsible for a parent leaving
right but I took something in that was
different and it's really affected me
and I kind of feel differently about
myself. It's not that everything
instantaneously changes, but boy, the
world is different. Then
on that subject as well of say the
father leaving at 4 years old and me
thinking that men were was that say I
was 4 years old and my father was
violent. What you sometimes see is
people then are attracted to the
familiar when they grow up. So although
it wasn't healthy, they have a sort of
bias towards being attracted to
something that was familiar even if it
wasn't healthy. Right? That gets
complicated. What sometimes people will
talk about as repetition compulsions are
are quite complicated. Often what a
person is doing then is trying to gain a
sense of mastery over a situation in
which they had no control. So you will
see this in abusive relationships where
you know sometimes a person will come uh
and say, "Okay, I'm coming to see you,
but I know you can't help me, right? My
last like eight relationships have been
just awful. So how can you possibly help
me?" And then I might say something
like, "If you can tell me how you had
eight different relationships that
didn't go well, maybe I'll believe you.
But you're going to tell me about the
same relationship eight times over."
Right? Something along those lines.
Because we repeat things that don't go
well in an effort to gain a sense of
control. So what often is the case in
that kind of situation is whether it's
repeating an abuse cycle or just someone
who isn't attentive or isn't interested
that the the person is trying to feel
better about something from the past.
Though if the father was inattentive and
that person has a romantic interest in
men, that person may choose men who are
inattentive with a desire to make them
inattentive to fix the the to soothe the
pain of the past because the emotion
systems in our brain don't care about
the clock and the calendar. So you can
solve the past in the present as far as
the emotion systems are concerned. And
if the trauma is very strong in us, the
emotion systems will rule the day. So
there you say the father was violent
then maybe that person chooses a violent
significant other right and then that
relationship goes away and the person
chooses another violent significant
other and then sometimes the thought is
oh the person is choosing that because
that's what they're comfortable with or
that's but no no the the person is is
trying to make sense of something and
there's some desperation inside to feel
better about themselves and to fix and
heal something. Whereas why if we can
intercede there and say the problem is
if you want someone who's attentive
choose people who are attent choose
someone who's attentive right as opposed
to choose someone who's not attentive
and try and make them attentive.
Can we become addicted to our
victimhood?
Sure. So there's no internalized victim
without an internalized persecutor. So
if someone is victimized in the sense of
the law, right? someone has done
something bad to that person, that
doesn't mean that person takes inside of
them that they were a victim, right? But
trauma can make us feel like victims.
After the loss of my brother, when I
felt like um maybe we're cursed and I'm
not I can't really get anywhere in the
world, like there's a black magic to
that, right? Then I used to feel like
I'm a victim of something. I don't I'm
behind the eightball. I then I have a
sense of otherness, right? And and now
I've taken something inside of myself
where we don't need a persecutor
anymore. I feel like I'm less than. So
how's that going to go well? Right? So
what we end up doing is we take inside
of us sometimes this sense of
victimness. But that
also takes inside of us the idea that we
are less than. That there is something
magical that is bad and negative. And
what we need to strive against is
exactly that. That something may have
happened that we might say okay that
person is a victim in the eyes of the
law. They were assaulted. Right? But
that doesn't mean that person has to
take victimness inside. Guilt and shame.
How many people have I seen who are
assaulted and they talk about how
they're ashamed of it and it's their
fault. Someone else attacked them.
Right? But the reflexive guilt and shame
of trauma can lead us to feel less than.
Then we start feeling like victims. Then
we feel less than. We embrace this and
we don't need someone to persecute us
anymore.
The lyic system. We're talking about the
brain here. What is the lyic system and
what role is it playing in cementing our
trauma?
Yeah. So the the lyic system is the name
for the emotion systems in the brain. So
we're simplifying a little bit, but the
idea that there are logic systems and
emotion systems. The emotion systems are
limbic. Those are the limbic systems and
they never lose when they come face to
face with logic. Right? The limbic, the
emotional always rules the logic. If the
two come headto head, which is why if
the emotion of trauma, the fear of being
less than, the need to repair something
that was unfair in the past, if that is
driving us, logic will not have its say.
You know, logic would say if you've
dated six people who've all kind of seem
the same at the outset and then all
behaved in the same negative way, don't
choose a seventh like that. Right? I
mean, logic very logic was saying that
at the second person, let alone the
third, the fourth, the fifth. Why do we
see repetition of unhealthy
relationships? Because the lyic system,
if it needs to feel different, it needs
so to speak to solve that trauma by
gaining mastery, it's going to go look
for the seventh person who's just like
the first six. But once we take the
energy, we lance the abscess, so to
speak, of the trauma, then logic can
have its say. And that person who says,
"You can't help me because the last
eight relationships were all awful."
Sees, oh, I did the same things, chose
the same person, the last eight
relationships. That's one paradigm, and
I'm changing it now. And then things are
different when they thought they
couldn't be because they can see now
what they couldn't see before. The lyic
system isn't ruling the day anymore.
There's a whole balanced brain that has
an understanding of self and uses that
understanding to move forward in life.
It seems like the lyic system is against
us. But but there must be some sort of
evolutionary
reason or rationale or purpose of that
limbic system that is, I don't know,
malfunctioning in the modern world.
Oh, sure. The limbic system isn't
against us. All these parts of our
brain, none of them hate us. They're all
part of they're all parts of us. And
some of the the research and
observations through the psychedelic
sciences are really telling us that much
more that there aren't parts of our
brain that hate us. They may work
against us because as you're commenting,
they're not built for the modern world.
So you know if you think about the lyic
system and the negative information like
something bad happened when you were
four or five like take that in and
whatever lesson that is never question
it or change it right I mean this is
based upon survival mechanisms. The
example I give is you know imagine for
most of human history and people of
hunting and gathering and living in
small groups and and like having enough
food was is very important for humans
across human evolution. If you find a
new food that it looks good, looks like
something else that was good and you and
you eat it and it tastes good and it's
nourishing like it's good to remember
that. But if you eat it and you get very
very sick, like you better remember that
forever, right? So that the negative has
much more salience in us and makes these
lessons. Never go near that thing again,
never go near that person again, never
do this again. They're designed to keep
us alive, but we're trying to do more
than that, right? We're trying to do
more than stay alive. And these systems
in us that evolve to keep us safe then
can very much work against us. A person
who's traumatized because someone
attacks them and that system gives them
panic attacks if they leave the front
door. I mean that's that person's brain
trying to keep them safe.
You use the word shame a lot when we're
talking about trauma
in the same way that I asked um is the
lyic system against us. What is the use
of shame? Why do we experience shame?
Can't we just program ourselves to get
rid of shame and then we'll all be fine?
Right? Exactly the same with the limit
question. No, we kind of need shame, but
we need shame for good reason. Right?
So, so these primary affects that that
are very um primordial in us. Anger,
fear, love, shame, these are things that
are just aroused in us. like they can
become other things once we start
thinking about them, but they're states
that that that are very deep within us.
They all have a survival adaptation. So,
you know, love, feeling love is, you
know, being more than one. You know, we
love someone now you are too. And you're
and you're there with one another and
that's going to help you survive and
make your way forward in life. Love is
adaptive, right? Fear can be very
adaptive that now you're in a fight
orflight stage. You're trying to survive
and get through life. Shame is the same
way. There are things that people do
that bring shame that change behavior.
Shame changes behavior a lot because it
feels so bad. So you know I give the
example of I imagine that you know in
the old days you know someone who um you
know pees on the food in the cave
instead of going outside you know and
like now puts the whole tribe at risk or
people and and then like there's a sense
of shame that comes to that person like
you can't do that anymore and the person
feels bad and never does that again and
it's adaptive for the group. Right? It's
just one example of how shame can alter
behavior. So
to keep us alive in that context,
right? To keep us alive. Like now you
feel shame. You will not forget to not
do that anymore, right? Like it's going
to have an impression on it's going to
change you because you feel so much
shame which we would think should be the
case in the modern world too, right? We
there are things people do that are
shameful that are worth feeling shame
about. I mean sometimes the problem is
we don't have enough shame where we
should. But we have a lot of new modern
problems, don't we, with I was thinking
about bullying,
for example. Like I I I imagine back in
the days of our tribes, there wasn't
internet, like obviously not, but there
wasn't like mass internet bullying where
a huge group of strangers could just
pepper you with insults. And maybe our
our modern brain still has the same old
mechanisms of kind of perceiving that as
our tribe are going to kick us off the
island here,
right? So the brain malfunctions and
experiences shame which causes all the
things you described. And then even in
the context of like sexual assault, I
was trying to rationalize that how the
shame of sexual assault can make you
feel shame when really it was someone
else's
right behavior. But how does that make
that you know that woman feel or that
guy feel
shame about themselves when they were
attacked?
Right? Because it doesn't start with the
thought of it. Because you're right.
Because what you're saying, I think, is
basically it makes no logical sense. Why
would you feel ashamed of yourself if
someone else came up behind you and
jumped you and did something awful to
you? Why would you feel ashamed of
yourself? Right? But but the person
doesn't get there by thought, right? I
didn't get to feeling ashamed of myself
after losing my brother by suicide by
thinking that is a shameful thing. I
should feel ashamed. No, no, the shame
is aroused in us. It's created in us
because it's behavior modifying. There's
there's the adaptive something bad has
happened. Feel something inside that
creates a version. The shame is created
in us and then we make the meaning of
it. I feel ashamed. There's shame
inside. I mean then we make the meaning
of right because I shouldn't have been
there when that happened and then then
we make a story around it. It starts
with the liyic system with the affect
and then we build a story around it
which is why we can build a different
story where for example shame goes where
it makes sense to go. Like that's very
very effective of processing through
food. So okay, so this thing happened.
You can process through with someone how
they felt and you know what was going on
inside of them. Maybe they're in an
ambulance or a hospital. They're filled
with shame. They realize what is
happened to them and you know and then
that was a terrible state to be in. But
then they start put they start making
trying to make meaning of that state and
we can go back to oh that's a that's a
natural completely understanding human
state to be in after this happened but
now you get to decide what that means.
So, in the context of our ancestors, I'm
walking through the I don't know,
Serengeti with my
with my big spear [snorts] and I'm
walking and a lion jumps out at me out
of the blue. I managed to survive it
although I've been attacked. I the shame
is created in me because as a response
to make sure my behavior changes so it
doesn't happen again. And then I write a
story about that when I get back to the
cave and tell myself like the story
could be that I shouldn't have been
walking out at night in the Serengeti
alone when that lion attacked me and
that's adaptive and useful because it
stops me from doing that in the future.
It's like a
so
I'm trying to think of it through
maybe it's it's a little different if
you were out. Okay, let's say you're out
and you're actually like you're hunting
a lion in the service of everyone else
and then you're attacked and hurt. That
it's that's different because you're
doing something then to to feel proud
of.
Yeah.
Right. So So that is is different where
that's a situation where the person is
approaching the trauma on the front foot
and then when you return back the
thought would be you'd be respected and
cared for like you know you went out to
do something for everyone and got hurt.
That is very different than how people
normally would would ex experience their
their trauma, which is when there there
isn't a sense of of pride and
self-sacrifice behind it. So So if the
person let's say you're walking out in
the Serenetti at night and you shouldn't
be, then you should feel bad about that,
right? Then the thought would be, "Yeah,
I shouldn't have been doing that." And
how bad you feel about it will make you
not do it again. So you're less not
going to get killed, right? And then
you're going to come back and talk about
that or people are going to go, "What
were you doing?" and well, you should
have been out there and like they may
feel bad that you got hurt, but like
there's there's an experience that is a
deterrent to others doing that too,
right? So,
this says something really interesting
about how we treat people who've been
through a trauma,
right? The look at the difference in the
United States between veterans coming
back from World War II and veterans
coming back from Vietnam. There was far
more post-trauma syndromes,
post-traumatic stress disorder after
Vietnam because people were not coming
home to a hero's welcome. The thought
the thought there would be they had gone
out like the person who goes out into
the Serengeti to hunt the lion is to
save everybody else is that's what was
going on when people went to fight in
World War II and when pe when people
went to fight in Vietnam. But when
people came back from World War II and
if they'd been hurt, they were treated
as heroes. They were treated with
respect and and that allows a person to
shoulder that trauma without the brain
changes happening. When people came back
from Vietnam and were were treated
differently, which didn't happen to
everyone, but it happened as a societal
phenomenon that was that was a terrible
thing for the veterans who came back.
You saw much greater rates of
post-traumatic stress. I mean, that's
that I think captures very clearly what
the impressions and perspectives of the
people around us mean. There may be a
reflexive guilt and shame from trauma,
but that doesn't have to win the day,
but it was much more likely to win the
day if there's a sense of otherness. Cuz
now we're, you know, we're talking about
the same thing of feeling less than
chronically by society for some reason
makes that person more susceptible. So
that person who's been through combat
trauma and then comes back and does not
receive a hero's welcome is put at much
much greater risk for the brain changes
of post-t trauma syndromes. What role
does vulnerability and being open with
others about how we're feeling play in
alleviating our shame? Oh,
sure. It plays it plays in for most of
us in most cases, it plays a very big
role because the reflex to the trauma is
guilt and shame. And the reflex to the
guilt and shame is to hide it inside.
what we are doing is cutting oursel off
from the human contact that we need in
order to process what has gone on with
us. So very many times over 25 years of
being a psychiatrist, I've sat with
someone who is putting words to their
trauma for the first time. You know,
when I was five years old, I was
assaulted in that way. This coach did
this to me when I was a certain age. Uh,
I was hurt this way and I'm the only one
who survived and my two buddies died.
These are real things that I have that I
have heard people say and then be
shocked that I, the other human in the
room, don't recoil from that
because they've held so long inside of
them that it is shameful that they were
assaulted. It is shameful that they
survived that that it's so dangerous to
even utter it. The fear of how a person
will react that someone is surprised
like wow you could hear that or they
they say it in ways and kind of step
back a little bit because there's such
an expectation of rejection whereas what
the person is telling me is something
that from any reasonable human being
would only elicit compassion.
Now, that person who's telling me would
only ever be compassionate to someone
saying that, but they're not
compassionate to themselves.
Is shame really the cause of what we
kind of think of as these trauma cycles?
Because someone experiences a trauma,
they suppress it, which changes how they
behave, which means that they're more
likely to experience more trauma in some
way or at least perceive it as a trauma
via shame. and then they kind of their
life gets more and more full of
different types of trauma. Does that
make sense? Because I'm wondering if
like trauma can be quite a
self-fulfilling thing where you get into
a cycle of trauma in your life.
Well, it can be. I mean, in the case of
the person who now finally puts words to
something they've held inside of them
that they would know is not shameful to
anyone else, but they hold as shameful
for them. Right? What is going on inside
of them may or may not have caused
further trauma, right? I mean, it it's
it's caused suffering, right? There's no
doubt about that. When a person is is is
saying that and they're they're putting
words to something that's so important
has been inside of them, it has caused
them suffering. So they haven't been as
happy as they could be, enjoyed life as
much as they could be, been as outgoing
as they can be, been depressed when
maybe they didn't have to be depressed.
So, so the trauma is impacting them
because they've hid it down inside,
right? If you can talk about it and
bring light to it, let's say after that
thing that happened when the the person
was assaulted at 5 years old or survived
an accident, others didn't. If someone
did trauma work with them of, hey,
you're what are you feeling now? Okay,
let's get to the fact that person is
feeling guilt and shame and the
naturalness that they are, but it
doesn't tell them truth, right? It's
just telling them how they feel. And in
fact, it comes from compassionate places
inside of us. we can help to unwind that
before it becomes a thing inside the
person that yes may make life less
enjoyable or may also in a way that's
worse push towards repeated trauma. So
the the trauma of choosing the same
unhealthy partner or the same abusive
partner over and over is an example of
what you're saying. If a person doesn't
look at the trauma and like why am I
doing this? What am I trying to solve
here? Right? I'm trying to solve
something maybe from childhood that was
somebody else's shortcoming or fault or
someone else's shame. Okay, I can stop
doing that. Then the person can stop
with repeating the behavior. So the
answer to all I think the answer to what
you're asking is absolutely yes. And if
we're curious and we strive for
understanding ourselves and we know that
there are routes to change, this is how
we heal from traumas that ultimately
invisible epidemic is a is a message of
warning. But it's not a a negative or a
pessimistic message. It's a positive
message. It says if we understand this
and we look at it, well, guess what
happens is we get better. We prevent
trauma. We take care of the trauma in
ourselves and others and we get
healthier. Like I see this play out in
25 years of doing this. It's like this
is what happens. But we only get there
if we have the curiosity. We we you know
we're interested and we know enough to
go looking and thinking and making a
narrative and you talking about
ourselves and wanting things to be
different and knowing that they can be.
So it's a message of hope because when
we do that we really see change. So
clinically when doing this work you see
a lot of difference in people. And
that's part of what's been so heartening
and led me to write the book is it's not
just a message of oh this is what's
going on with us. Let's take a look at
it. This is what's going on with us. And
if we look at it, absolutely, we make
life better.
I want to talk about some of the ways
that trauma impacts us that are less
obvious. One of them I'm interested in
is sleep. A lot of people are struggling
with sleep these days. Is there a link
between sleep issues and trauma?
Yes.
And how strong is that link?
Yes. So, so sleep is one of the symptoms
of a post-trauma syndrome. It's not an
all post-trauma syndrome. So higher
anxiety, lower mood, behavioral changes,
sleep is one of these factors and sleep
is very often negatively impacted by
trauma. So the changes you had asked
about in the brain and then we talked
about how they go more towards
vigilance, more towards activation, they
make it harder for the brain to settle
down and be in a restorative state. So
sometimes we get what was called
ruminative where there just thought
loops going on inside of us and the
brain doesn't want to quiet down to a
place where we can get restorative
sleep. So people have more fragmented
sleep they have shallower less
restorative sleep more time until they
can fall asleep earlier awakenings. So
this is very very bad for us across the
board. I mean talk about the union of
physical and mental health. Sleeping
very poorly is terrible for us from head
to toe. And very often after trauma, if
there is a post-trauma syndrome, which
is not uncommon, sleep patterns are
dramatically changed and and sleep
restorative function is changed. What
happens is we're in higher states of
arousal. And neurobiologically, this
isn't about sexual arousal. It's it's
just state of alertness, right? So we're
in too high a state of arousal, too high
a state of alertness. And then the brain
systems inside of us that need to really
simmer down in order to restore aren't
able to fully do that.
I guess there must be some kind of link
there as well because if I'm in that if
I'm less comfortable with being with my
own thoughts because they're rum
ruminative that I'm overthinking all the
time, I'm then also more likely when I'm
trying to settle down to be trying to
stimulate myself. Like a lot of people
aren't comfortable with just being
sitting in a room alone with their
thoughts, especially if they're, you
know, an overinker. So then they might
grab their phone. They might
sure
be, you know, doing things to stimulate
themselves at a later hour of night, but
it all comes back to the trauma.
Absolutely. Yes. Yes. And you're
describing how the downstream effects of
all of this are tremendous. So
absolutely yes. So So we're saying
getting less sleep is just bad for us
from head to toe. Okay. And also there's
all the things that you're talking
about. So, if you know you're going to
try and sleep and it's going to be just
going over and over again in your head
and it might be I'm not safe or I'm
going to get fired or I'm going to get
hurt or it may just be something that's
simple and negative that you don't even
relate to trauma like oh this is awful
or light I mean these are things that go
over and over again in people's heads
when they're trying to sleep like I'm
not okay what's going to happen and it's
going over and over again so of course
you're going to want to distract from
that
and and you cuz the way we've kind of
framed it there is that you're aware and
conscious of that but can that taking
place in like the back room of your mind
where you
Oh, sure. Sure. Sometimes people are
aware and sometimes they are not.
Sometimes to ask a personal why why
aren't you sleeping well the last four
months? Which seems like a good question
to ask instead of just giving the person
a sleeping medicine. But in modern
medicine, sometimes the question doesn't
get asked. But you know, maybe the
answer is
something really different trying to
fall asleep and like I just don't feel
peaceful anymore. But but the person has
not thought of that until you ask them.
Then what's the logical next question?
Why? Right? What happened? anything
change around then? And a lot of times
you get an answer and that person is a
trauma problem, not a sleep problem. You
can probably pound the sleep system to
sleep with medicine. But now we're doing
something that ultimately is harmful for
the person. So yes, and also you know
when you talk about avoidance behaviors
of sleep, this is also why the person
can avoid avoid avoid and then have
three or four drinks to get to sleep,
right? So there's so much that is
unhealthy that then perpetuates
being unhealthy and it spreads and this
is part of the epidemic aspect of this
and and then people often don't know
why things are different in their sleep.
But a lot of the time if you stop and
you think and you talk about what's
going on inside of them they will tell
you. And it may be that for the first
time they're telling themselves which is
why we should ask ourselves this
question. You said to Rich Roll,
"Amongst the conditions I have seen
treated, the absolute worst in mental
health treatment and indeed in general
medical treatment are sleep problems."
Mhm.
Why? Because sleep underlies so much and
because we when we we have a lot of
hammers in medicine, so we see a lot of
nails. So if someone is not sleeping,
the reflex in medicine, and not everyone
does this, and I'm not trying to say
they're all physicians or practitioners
are not behaving in the right way, but
we we work in systems that are high
volume and designed for throughput. So
they're designed for symptom
identification. So what we say is, okay,
you're not sleeping, so we'll give you
sleeping medicine. Like that simple. But
the reasons people are not sleeping are
very very often not related to their
sleep systems. They're related to these
vigilance and activation systems inside
of us. So if if that's what's going on
in me and I'm agitated and have this
highly aroused state after trauma and
maybe it's been going on for 2 weeks or
maybe it's been going on but getting
worse for 2 years, but this is what's
going on and I can't settle down and my
sleep system can't overcome it. you
know, if you give me a sleeping medicine
for that, I'm probably going to need a
lot of it, right? Because we're trying
to make the sleep system overcome the
distress. I'm more likely to get
addicted to it. I mean, there's a lot of
bad we do to people and I never have an
opportunity to address my problem.
What should we be doing instead?
We should be asking why. Why is it that
you are not sleeping? And maybe it came
out of the blue. Maybe maybe your sleep
system every now and then fails you. But
when we start asking those questions, we
get answers. And more often than not,
those answers are in the realm of
trauma. Then that person does not get a
trauma medicine. They may get a
different medicine that in the short
term can quiet the vigilance systems.
This we do this a lot where the person
has a sleeping problem. We learn the
trauma history. We use a short course of
a medicine that calms the vigilance
systems. Has nothing to do with making
the person sleep. And then they start
sleeping well. And maybe this is true.
They might not have slept well with
five, six, 10 sleeping medicines. But
that is not the medicine that they need,
right? They need a medicine to calm
these distress systems inside of us so
that the sleep system, which is not
damaged, can go and do its thing. And
and while we realize this, we can start
talking about the trauma. And maybe the
person can process some of the trauma.
Now the sleep problem is gone.
Everything is better. The person's not
going to be on a sleep medicine for the
next 20 years. It's healthier. It's
safer, but we have to be more than
reflexive, right? There are a lot of
reasons people don't sleep.
What about a link between weight and
trauma? I've heard I've heard a ton of
studies over the years about how um
various people who are obese have higher
levels of sort of traceable trauma. Is
there any truth to this?
Yes. So, there are probably almost
surely a couple of factors. One is look
it's hard enough to take care of
ourselves you know even when things are
going really well right I mean life is
so busy and so stressful so it's hard to
take care of oneself if a person adds
trauma to the mix it becomes harder to
take care of oneself and one way we can
not take care of ourselves is you know
what we're eating and whether we're
exercising so the trauma makes it harder
to take care of ourselves and
predisposes to poor self-care now we
have you know person who's overweight
and then maybe pushing towards diab
diabetes or heart disease or cardiovas
or or cerebrovascular disease. And also
just like we talked about epigenetics
and and changes in gene transcription,
what genes are active in us, trauma puts
us in a place where we are more
inflammatory within us. Like there are
more inflammatory markers in our blood
vessels. So it's not as clean and clear
as we would like it to be. We're not as
healthy. And this works against the
health of our blood vessels and the
health of our immune system. So the soup
we swim in, so to speak, is changed by
the trauma. And then those higher levels
of inflammatory markers, for example,
that are circulating in our bloodstream
can make it harder to lose weight. The
body starts holding on to more calories
and it makes it harder for our blood
vessels to stay healthy and then we get
less and less healthy. And part of that
is the biological effect of trauma, just
like the epigenetics, right? And part of
it is the changes psychologically and
the changes in self-care.
How do you convince someone that comes
into your practice and tells you that
they can't change? They don't believe
they can change. How do you convince
them that they can?
Well, I'm a huge believer in the power
of knowledge and the power of
information, which I think goes back to
how powerless I felt as a kid when we
couldn't understand medical information.
It's like, I want to know. I want to
understand and I think I think a lot of
people are like this. I think we as
humans don't get enough credit that we
want to understand and I think so much
in our society is reflexive like you
know what you know and you feel how you
feel and then you know we have a whole
set of beliefs about the world because
we affiliate with some group or another
right I think that's a reaction to
feeling so disempowered and that what we
really want is knowledge and I think
that's a reason why for example
knowledge imparting podcasts are so
valued because you're not trying to tell
people what to do or how to think but
you're you're giving them bringing them
knowledge
And and that's what I try and do of like
I know that's not true. Now it may be
that if you're a science-based or a
rational person or you're an engineer or
an accountant like I might try and get
at you through this through the science,
right? I might get try and get at you
through that article, right? This is
something that can like let you see that
or I might try and get at it through
examples of hey here's like people do
change like here's kind of really what
the state-of-the-art is now and like
kind of get you excited about that.
Give me an example. There are a lot I
could cite, but the one that comes to
mind is the one story in in my book that
is uh just an amazing story of a person
who had had a trauma in her life that
had just changed everything. Mood,
anxiety, behavior, choices in the world.
I mean, so much had gone in a way that
was not how this woman was built to live
her life or how she was living her life.
And it was so striking her telling me
about who she was at some point in the
past and contrasting that to how she was
living and how she thought about
herself. And it was really a night and
day difference. And it became clear
there was a very abrupt change at this
tra at the time of this trauma. like a
night and day change towards
dysfunction, poor health, poor social
function, misery. And she had no thought
or idea that she could be like she was
before because all she knew was that
things had changed and now she was like
this and this was not okay and never
going to change. But she was willing to
see the starkness of the change and to
hear my observations and examples like
look I I see something here that's
looking from the outside that's really
striking and and that's we could think
about and talk about and understand and
and like changed her entire life and it
really is true that 10 years later she
looked 10 years younger. Absolutely. Is
this a one hit wonder though or is it a
training process like me being in the
gym and picking up weights over and over
again? Am I having to retrain my mind to
view that situation differently?
Yes. Yes. We are creatures of neuronal
habit. So if you think the example I
give I usually use is let's say you and
I just picked a word random word and we
said it 500 times, right? We'd each be
saying it this evening. Let's say we say
it 2,000 times. You know, give it a
couple days. It's still there on the
mind. Why? Even when we know it's a
silly example, why would it still stay
with us? Because when we say that word
so many times, we're strengthening
memory connections. That word comes to
mind more. It's stronger within us. And
then the only way it goes away is it
atrophies over time. You know, is you
can't just make that go away after you
said it a couple thousand times. It'll
go away.
It gets less and less powerful over
time. So, if you don't keep saying that
word, you know, it comes to mind maybe
10 times the next day, five the second
day, three times, then not again. But
this is how processes of change work
inside of us. So someone who has for
example had selft talk in them said oh
it'll never work out for me or like I
suck and no one likes me or you know I'm
terrible or how could you you idiot or
you know things like I had a shadow
voice saying these things to me for
years like that doesn't want to go away
at once because it's just habituated
inside of us. So we have to realize look
that is not real and true. I don't that
is not what I think what I want to say
to myself. So I want to know when it's
there. I want to realize I'm saying this
to myself and I don't believe it. Then
we make it less strong, right? We make
it less strong. Every time we say
something that's a negative lie to
ourselves like no one will ever love me,
right? People say that to themselves
over and over, we make that more
powerful as if it were true. And if if
it's as if it were true, is it true? Our
brain can't tell the difference now. So
if we we understand that and now we want
to change it. Like I know why I said
that because when I was growing up that
parent that person always said that to
me over and over and over and then you
know I chose bad relationships cuz I
didn't think I was worth anything better
and they didn't go well and it
reinforced that to me like a person
really understands that we bring that
understanding to bear in a way that you
speak against that when it comes into
your mind because we can't make it not
come into your mind. It can atrophy me
in this process of slowly over time it
goes away. But we have to say the whole
me I talk about the judge in the middle
of all the opinions has to say okay I
know I'm saying this to myself right but
do I believe that or not?
Can you really completely get rid of a
trauma? Can you take a trauma to zero?
Well we won't lose the memory of it. If
something bad has happened we're not
going to entirely forget it.
That means it can trigger us again in
the future. Well, the question is how
much does it trigger, right? How much
does it trigger? The idea is to
attenuate the response to it. So, if if
it was a car accident and every time the
person looks at a car, they have a panic
attack, right? It's probably it's
probably not going to happen that
someday they look at a car and don't
even remember, right? But they can look
at a car and like they know they had a
car accident. We're not they're not
trying to hide it from themselves. Oh my
god, I can't see a car. I had a car
accident. It triggers me. Like I'm I'm
understanding that. I understand the
naturalness of the responses in me and
how they got maybe were perpetuated by
the fear that I felt and I wasn't
working through it or working through
the loss that happened. Now that I'm
understanding that more, I don't have to
be afraid of this. So, I see a car in
this, it makes me kind of uncomfortable,
but it's okay.
A lot of people beat themselves up
because they've done a lot of work,
right?
And this trauma still remains. I think
I'm one of those people where there's
certain traumatic things from my
childhood, done a lot of work. I
logically know that it's not true. like
that that belief I had is not true. Yet,
I'm still prone to be triggered on a bad
day about that particular thing.
Right. Right. Look, that's that's how it
goes when a person is navigating through
trauma and really getting through like
getting over a lot of difficult things
and getting to a much better place but
responds to the triggering in a way that
inadvertently reinforces the trauma. So,
I would say if you're having a bad day
and you have a memory of something that
you kind of know you got over, but then
that raises the same set of thoughts or
feelings that aren't good, right?
Instead of my guess is that you're
feeling bad about that, like I did all
this work and I didn't get over it,
right? To say, look, isn't it
interesting like how strong this
imprints us that this is still going to
come to my head today. It's going to
come into my head like I'm having a bad
day or I drop something in the morning
and I don't feel great about myself.
This stuff is very, very powerful, but
still not telling me truth. you know
that shoulder shrug about it, okay, it's
going to come into your head. It was
neuronally reinforced and sometimes
you'll be having a bad day and it'll
come in. It doesn't mean anything. Lady
Gaga sits at the very top of your book
and she's written the forward in your
book.
There's this wonderful quote inside
there that says,
I can now say with certainty that this
man saved my life. He made life worth
living. But most importantly, he
empowered me to find and reclaim myself
again.
That is an incredible thing for anyone
to say to anyone else.
Thank you. My first thought is she's
eloquent and generous of spirit and I
and I so appreciate that she wrote such
lovely words and I and I so so
appreciate that. Please thank you.
Why did she say that? you know, as she
has talked about, there's trauma in her
life and to gain an understanding, a
much better understanding, and be able
to ground to the things about her that
are wonderful. And she's a wonderful
person. There's wonderful, there's
wonderfulness in us, no matter who we
are. And I think from the perspective of
her on such a big world stage,
acknowledging
the trauma and the humanness in her and
that like anyone else, she needed some
understanding. She needed um some help
forward in different pathways of thought
about self like the kind of thing any of
us need after trauma. and she had the
the bravery, the fortitude to, you know,
to take chances to be different. You
know, just like someone would say, I
can't be any different. We can all feel
that when we have a lot of trauma inside
of us, and it's hard to think, I'm going
to really try and be different. I'm
going to take that chance. But, you
know, in order to to change our lives,
we have to do that. And and and she also
did that. It's a it's a very very human
story in I think a deeply feeling person
who then wants to bring that message
forward to others that we can change
trauma. And I'm I'm I'm so grateful she
wrote the forward to my book. But part
of that is she's she believes in that
message that trauma does not have to
control us. We can understand it. We can
get our arms around it. And I think
that's what she is you that's what she's
communicating in that quote. That's the
part of that quote that's important. The
part that's about everyone reading it
and the and the capacity for change. You
have some incredible celebrities um on
the book inside the book that have given
[clears throat] you quotes for the book.
People like Kim Kardashian, Tommy
Hilfiger, etc., etc., Lady Gaga, as I
mentioned. I'm guessing these these
people at some point came to you without
sort of disclosing client
confidentiality issues. I'm just
wondering how you find yourself in a
position as a psychiatrist that the this
caliber of people are seeking out your
support.
Well,
and does that ever feel a bit surreal?
Yeah, I think I think it does. I mean, I
like to think of myself as a diligent
person who wants to continue working at
things and moving them forward and and
uh seeing where they can go. And and I
think at some point in time, I realized
I had the capacity to to perhaps reach
people who reach a lot of other people,
right? And and there's been a real joy.
I I think that people who have who are
public facing I mean there are a lot of
stresses to that you know we people can
think oh it seems so wonderful from the
outside but there's a lot of extra
stress to that from the inside so to be
able to address some of the extra
complexity of that and to be able to
help people who have a big impact on the
world around them uh was um and sort of
a joy to pursue. We have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest, not knowing who they're going to
be leaving it for. And the question
that's been left for you feels quite
fitting and very interesting. I really
like this one.
It just says, it's not even written as a
question. It just says,
erase one regret from your life dot dot
dot. Wow.
You know, I think I should have
paid more attention
to the world around me when I was
younger and more lost in trying to feel
good enough at the moment. And I think
that it
made it harder to sort of find my path.
And I think it made it harder. I think
my brother hadn't found his path. And I
think there was a lot of frantic anxiety
or fear driven forward movement without
pausing and circumspection. And it may
be that we just talked about we've
talked about his suicide and we've
talked about that in this podcast. So
it's it's kind of at the forefront of my
memory. But when I think back then I
probably knew well enough to be more
circumspect including about what might
have been going on in him or in me. And
um
I'm happy I got myself on a path that's
led to places that feel good and that I
think are generative and productive. Um
I wish I had more attention to the
bigger picture when I was significantly
younger.
Why?
Well, I think I would have made better
decisions. I think I would have seen
pathways that led away from health and
happiness and maybe seen that in others
too. Um because some
You're talking about Jonathan
and others where I where where I was
born and raised. I think there there
were a lot of good people and a lot of
forward movement, but um we maybe could
have looked around ourselves a little
bit more and there'd be several people
maybe still here as opposed to not being
here and people being healthier. And um
I think I probably had it in me to look
around myself more than I did at that
time. And I do sometimes feel I will
feel regrets about that.
Well, I have to say, Dr. Paul Conti,
the work you've committed your life to
and the understanding you've committed
your life to spreading um
is going to save many many many many
many people's lives.
Thank you.
And not just save their lives, but
sometimes it's not always about saving a
life. It's about improving the standard
of someone's life which I think can have
a generational impact if that person is
to stay alive and they are to you know
if we look through the lens of
epigenetics or just about the how
internalized shame and guilt and all of
this can be passed on through vicarious
forms of trauma that the kids might feel
and whatever. you know, your work and
your your future work, I deeply believe,
is going to save and improve thousands
and thousands and tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of people's lives.
And that is an unbelievably remarkable
thing to commit one's life to.
Thank you.
There's no words that I could say in the
30 seconds I have now that would would
express the extent of the good that
that's going to do in the world.
Wow.
And I I you know, I can't imagine those
people that are here and not here, how
proud they would be. and are of you.
Thank you
for turning your trauma into such a
wonderful healing important thing.
So on behalf of all of those people that
you'll never get to meet that you've
helped with your work, I want to say
thank you so much.
Wow. Well, you're very welcome and thank
you for those kind words which I take to
heart and thank you for having me on. I
appreciate it.
[music]
Heat. Heat. N.